$category Course
$level Novice
$title How to Deal with Designers and Other Creators</title>
$poster //data.doingbydesign.com.s3.amazonaws.com/_images/udemycourses/DoYouReallyNeedADesigner.png
$author Petr van Blokland
$topic Learn how to deal with designers in this 10 minute course.</topic>
$summary Of course you have ideas, and taste and you have the full understanding of why you want this design, and how it will be part of all the other new developments in your company or in your home. But you need someone to work that out for you, to fill in the details. To get it ready for manufacturing. To judge, what is feasible and what is fashionable. 
$featured how-to-get-into-art-school, interiors, typography, generous-gesture. how-to-build-a-simple-kirby-site, how-to-get-into-art-school

h1. Introduction

p(lead). Welcome to this course. If you are working with designers, in your professional life or in your private life, this course is made for you. Perhaps you anticipate hiring a designer, because you want a new interior. Or an exhibition. Or a new fashion line. Or a new dress. And you are sure that you or your organization does not have the appropriate skills to create something great. 

Of course you have ideas, and taste and you have the full understanding of why you want this design, and how it will be part of all the other new developments in your company or in your home. But you need someone to work that out for you, to fill in the details. To get it ready for manufacturing. To judge, what is feasible and what is fashionable. 
Maybe you want a new website for your company. Or a logo. Or a new innovative product. Or a catchy advertisement campaign. Or a new building. So you ‘google’ through associating words, while making notes about what you like. You search on sites with similar products, where the style fits your ideas, matching what you have in mind. You are aware that there could potentially be a budget issue, looking at the work of Famous Designers, but that’s a problem to be solved later. You review what your competitors have done before and you try to guess where they are heading. 

!(first)//data.petr.com.s3.amazonaws.com/_images/house/exterior/buro_rietveld_gracht_cepezed2.jpg

p(caption). House at Rietveld Delft by CEPEZED.

You then write a brief to describe the context for this new design and you may even compose a mood board, to visualize what you like and perhaps what you don’t like. By the way, this course will show you the methods for doing these things. 
You search through portfolios, read about previous projects of various designers or architects. You try to find the matching designer or design studio for your brief and mood board. One that understands what you want. And at the same time one that doesn’t only do what you tell him, or else you wouldn’t need to hire one.
You ask around in your network for opinions and recommendations. Which designer should be invited for a presentation? Who would perform best in a pitch? Which one is likely to conceive the best design solution and work within your budget? And meanwhile not behaving too much, or else no new things will come out. 
You have to select the right designer. If you find out, half way into the project you made the wrong choice, it is too late. You want a guarantee of success[1], Design in this course is defined as: the process in which sketching and prototyping is repeated and gets better in every cycle.
before the designer really starts spending hours and costs. On the other hand, selecting the designer just from his portfolio can be risky. Your design problem may be something totally different from anything that the designer has done before. In that case you have no clue, wether the designer is capable of delivering the right quality in the available amount of time. Which type of collaboration works best for the project? Should it be a public or a private pitch? Who is going to judge? And by what criteria?</p>

bq. The processes and parameters described in this course may not seem compatible. These are all parameters that otherwise would have guided the course in a more dedicated direction.

So, instead of making the choice right away, you postpone the final choice by initiating a pitch and you divide the risk. Several designers are invited to present their work. 
In order to make the presentations focus on your problem, instead of their portfolio, you give all designers a brief and a binding presentation date. How to formulate such a brief? How to solve the dilemma between giving accurate information, with the best expected result and too little information, where it becomes better visible how much initiative each of the designers has. What is a reasonable amount of time? What is the optimum amount of designers for a pitch? Too few does not establish the right comparison and competition. And too many is too much work to compare them all. And is the pitch a good method for selection anyway? Is it the task of the customer to think up better methods?
Should you invite one or more designers to run a pilot project, a small scale assignment, that shows enough aspects of the real project, to make the selection easier?
Should you request total insight on every level of details and decision making, or do you want to be surprised at the end, taking the risk of complete failure? How can you make designers do what you need, within the given time frame and budget? While still giving them all the freedom they need, to be creative and innovative?

For the record: I am fully aware that there are male designers and female designers, and that there are female customers and male customers, so I will alternate referring to each of them as male or female during this course. Making the customer the opposite gender as the designer in the text of this course, will simplify the language. We’ll start with a male designer and female customer in this chapter. Then in the next chapter this will swap.

!(first)//data.doingbydesign.com.s3.amazonaws.com/_images/udemycourses/DoYouReallyNeedADesigner.png!

p(caption). Do you really[2] need a designer?

This course will present checklists, methods, use-cases and working models. You can use them as starting point for your selection process. And as a model for the way you -- as a customer -- want to interact with the designer. What is your role in the process? You need to learn to think like a designer -- a little bit, not too much, you are on the other side of the table. Your primary responsibilities are to keep the company alive. To maintain your household. It is not your responsibility to make the designer happy by all means. You need to be able to think like a designer, just enough to know how the processes work. To follow his line of reasoning. Why he shows what he shows. Why he comes up with the solutions he does. 
And you want to have the tools to make it clear to designers that it is your problem they should be solving. Not making something that simply fits their own taste.

If you are a design educator, this course is likely to be useful for you too, since most of the methods for stimulating designers also apply to design-students. And the course is definitely for designers, who are -- and all designers should be -- interested in how customers experience the design process. Know your opponents. 

h2. What is it about?

This is a generic course. When we talk about design and designers, you being the customer, manager or educator trying to get a functional design at the level of quality that you need, this course probably contains useful information. If you already know everything, good for you. Feel encouraged by the fact that you have supporters along your line of thinking. If there is new stuff in this course, then value its usefulness when you have to deal with the designer of your choice in your next design project[3]. It is a generic course, so the word design can have many different meanings. Design in this course is defined as: the process in which sketching and prototyping is repeated and gets better in every cycle. Then testing it against a set of requirements. The design is finished when all requirements are met within acceptable limits. Or when there is no time left.

bq. The processes and parameters described in this course may not seem compatible. These are all parameters that otherwise would have guided the course in a more dedicated direction.

This definition, or any similar definition of your choice, applies to a long list in arbitrary order and random hierarchy: movies, music, sculpture, web-design, architecture, corporate identities, consumer products, phones, interiors, airplanes, cars, books, fashion, software, processes, paintings, tools, children, magazines, business plans, stories, dance performances, industrial products, bicycles, computers, theatre plays, toys, apps, food, illustrations, documentaries, etc. 
Whatever the purpose and the medium of a design is, in the main process there is always someone with a problem or a question, holding some sort of a budget to get it solved, and on the other side there is a market of users who want to like it, hold it, own it, buy it and use it. Between the two sides of the spectrum there is the designer, who needs to transform the idea or the question into something that really is so irresistible that people go for it.

Any time a designer is mentioned in this course, it could also be a design studio or an agency. In principle there is not much difference, except that when you don’t talk to the people who actually do the design work, the amount of interference along the line will increase. How much is the original message transforming, and is it because of that? It is up to you to decide what the size of the organization is that you want to talk with. 
The other way around this is also true. If you talk with the designer, but you are dependent on your boss to make the final decisions, then there is also interference adding to the conversation. In most cases hidden agendas and hierarchical forces are not great stimulators for a healthy design environment. In case there is not an alternative, no practical solution to solve this, then you have to deal with it. But be aware that the solution may not reach the optimal level this way.

h2. Course context

My background is in both graphic design and programming. We have been running a design studio for over 30 years, specialized in corporate design, typography, type design, interiors, simulation games with customers and users, and automating the design processes.
Claudia and I combine over 40 years of experience in design education. Lecturing to students about how to develop their skills, how to become designers, is a good training in explaining how design processes work in general. And in specific situations. So we know both sides of the table.

bq. The processes and parameters described in this course may not seem compatible. These are all parameters that otherwise would have guided the course in a more dedicated direction.

By our definition, any process that includes learning, where you acquire skills by doing similar tasks again and again, getting better with every step, can be seen as a design process. 
It is also this kind of thinking that often is the main misunderstanding between you (the customer) and designers. This course will show you the different aspects of that problem and offer methods to make the design process fit better into your existing way of working. The process of customers is often based on linear production lines, where all the specifications are known upfront. The characteristics and quality of a product needs to be as close to these specifications as possible. That is the opposite of the task for designers who are supposed to define new areas of interest and to test how strict existing boundaries really are. This makes linear production lines by definition incompatible with the flow of design processes. The worst thing that can happen to a design process is mixing the two. To make production requirements collide with the creative process where everything is pretended to be possible. It is the standard designer’s nightmare, when the sales department starts to make comments about what they expect will be user responses. Yet not taking the limitation of the production process and preferences of the eventual user into account during the design also leads to disasters. It is the task of every player in the game to balance between total creative freedom and the fully described set of  production requirements.

* The chapter titles of the course show the bandwidth of the topic, ranging from the development of the selection criteria, the development of the List of Requirements and the models of operation, to testing, implementation and maintaining the contact.
* The first chapter -- the development of selection criteria -- will elaborate on your first contact with designers. How should you approach them, what is the sensitive part in the first hours of contact. What are issues that often go wrong, transforming the project into a drag or worse. There are various models on how you can work together. Do you have an overview with which to make an objective choice? Which one do you prefer? How can you try them out? And how much of this can you discuss with the designer of your choice?
* The second chapter will show models on how to define the project. What information do you need to give to the designer upfront to make him work in an efficient way, without filling in all the details before it all starts? What is the List of Requirements that you agree on, as the minimum or ultimate functionality of a product? And how do you want to pay for it all?
* The third chapter is a mini course about the dynamics of a design process. How does it work? And why does this so often go wrong when production people try to match up with the development department? The design process is about keeping balance between extreme positions, that by themselves don’t define a valid design solution. The chapter will address the iterative character of every design process. By definition there is no linear way to go from the initial brief to the final presentation. How do designers find their way through this maze of options while trying to ignore you as much as they can? What is your best role as customer in this process?

* The fourth chapter is about modeling. What is the level of details that is relevant in every section of the process? Too much detail in an early stage will slow down the process, so that it cannot be finished within the given time and budget. But totally ignoring the details will not lead to a product that can be produced, fitting the defined requirements. There are many methods to control the level of details in the model. The chapter will address some of them in depth.
* The fifth chapter dives more into your role in this process, as customer. How can you stimulate, expose your trust, gently guiding the directions and keeping an eye on the resources and the time? What is it that designers like? What is it that designers hate?
* The sixth chapter gives an overview of different scenarios that a design process can be based on, and about the different roles you can have. Some use cases are presented to illustrate how that can work.
* The seventh chapter is an overview on techniques that may help you to select the best from a set of existing designs. This could be a strategy for selecting the right furniture when walking through Ikea. Or selecting the best entry from all the participants of a pitch. Or the selecting one of the three logos or ads that the design is showing you in the final presentation.
* The eighth chapter is about testing. In an ideal world the testing should be an infrangible part of the any design process. In practice, however, it is not. Designers don’t like testing their designs. Apart from the fact that it shows the flaws in their taste and thinking, there is a more fundamental aspect here. 
Since a design is never finished, there is always an improvement possible. Especially in the eye of the designer. No design will ever be in the stage that it can be tested. So in practice the testing is done at the end of the process, in a stage where the project has run out of time, and then it is too late to make any more changes. It is the practical role of you, the customer or the teacher, to check on testing and validation, coaching the designer towards a finished product.
* The ninth chapter is about implementation. Once the design is done, there often is a long path before the design is implemented or produced. How much of that do you leave up to chance? Do you allow it to be a surprising lottery? Or is the implementation phase an obvious part of the entire process? And what role does the designer have then? If the designer does not come up with an answer to that question, maybe you should answer it. Or at least you could suggest your line of thought to your designer.
* The tenth chapter is about maintaining the contact with the  designer once the project is finished. In what way do you plan to continue using his services and advice? How is the legal part of Intellectual Property handled? Is this something you want to fight about in the end, in court, when it is too late? Or is a continued relationship in everyone benefit, in which case you want to agree on the legal issues before hand?
* In the supplementary files you will find the checklists, as summary of this course. You can put them next to your existing lists, or use them to start one. What tools do you have ready for approaching designers? What templates can you use to create an environment for creation, where both you and the designer will be satisfied with the result. How can you build on resources that cumulate the knowledge that you gather with the projects that you do. Not to make the same mistakes again. And helping your suppliers to learn from theirs too.

Designers are interesting creatures. Let’s see how you can fully exploit that, while keeping an eye on the required functionality, the budget and the right delivery time. Designers are the future of the world, because we need a lot of new stuff soon. Not just updated versions of what we already have. But really, really new stuff. It is your task to give them a comfortable nest to nurture their eggs.

fn1. It is a generic course, so the word design can have many different meanings.
fn2. A footnote reference in the middle of a sentence.
fn3. Design in this course is defined as: the process in which sketching and prototyping is repeated.
