$category Product
$title Concept
$poster //data.doingbydesign.com.s3.amazonaws.com/_images/udemycourses/HowToWearAGGShawl.png
$author Claudia Mens
$topic The concept of Concepts.
$featured how-to-build-a-simple-kirby-site, how-to-deal-with-designers, how-to-get-into-art-school
$language en
$summary The designer keeps the cardboard with the Idea covered for just a little time longer. Teasing the audience with pride. A great idea needs thorough explanation before showing it, because if you throw it on the table just like that, a customer may not understand it to the full extend. And with all the effort put into the design, that is something to avoid.

p(lead). Here is a little story about a designer presenting this new great idea.
“The designer keeps the cardboard with the Idea covered for just a little time longer. Teasing the audience with pride. A great idea needs thorough explanation before showing it, because if you throw it on the table just like that, a customer may not understand it to the full extend. And with all the effort put into the design, that is something to avoid.

The designer, who has some experience in entertaining uninterested groups, makes a speech about the importance of the Idea. About social relevance. About commitment. About the importance of the Idea on the iPad. About how this original Idea was conceived by a famous artist, specially rented for this job. And about the fact, that ambiguity will always vanish, with the proper amount of understanding.
The designer knows how to multiply tension and curiosity to the audience ultimate limit. The Idea, still invisible, will meet any expectation. And more than that. What remains now is the revelation itself. The decisive moment finally is there…”

What does the designer show to the Board of Directors? We will not know. This scene stops abruptly and leaves the reader wandering off, frustrated. We can only guess why the story is open-ended. It is a conceptual decision of the author, immune for any criticism, because an artist is always right. Even if that is not true.

Anyway, let’s try to imagine how the story could finish. After extensive introduction, the designer could conclude that from all conceivable names for logos, the word Concept explains everything. It is the best name for the client’s company. It tells all about the vision of the client and it fully identifies the innovative character of all future developments and products.

The one disadvantage of the word is that a search in Google yields more than 800 million hits. But to solve that problem, the designer worked out a creative conceptual solution. After doing research for at least 5 minutes, it is clear that doubling of the  letters in the word makes the search result more unique. So how many are needed? “Cooncept” – with 2 o’s – reduces the amount from 800 million to only 16,600 hits and by the time we reach “Cooooooooooooncept” (with 13 o’s) the number of hits found in Google – December 2012 – is reduced to zero. A unique design. 

By the way, adding o’s to the name Google in 2010 only needed 12 to be unique. In December 2012 we cannot tell anymore, because even the longest possible search word of Google with 124 o’s still has 82 finds. All the shorter ones give a valid result too.

“Concept” is an extremely important and indispensable part of the design. Designing without concept is like traveling without a dream. “Concept” is hot.

But “concept” is also too hot. Search on “concept+ontwerp” (Dutch for “concept+design”) did produce 745,000 – only Dutch – results in 2010. In December 2012 the result is even more than 3 million. The “Concept” is the Panacea for designers. The medicine that cures every disease. In Dutch this is called: Haarlemmer Oil. 

Concept is everywhere. Criticism on a design decision is easily countered by “It’s still in concept”. And if a product proves not to be working sufficiently in practice, it is often defended by the fact that this may be the case, but the “Concept behind it, is very strong.”

Concept designers may argue that this is not a good representation of ​​what “Conceptual thinking” really is. But then that statement itself is proof of the theorem. “Concept” is by definition elusive, the word describes itself. It not exactly clear what it means. And much effort is put into keeping it that way. Wikipedia shows a long list of different definitions of the word, summing up the various arguments what Concept means in Classical Theory, in Prototype Theory, in A Priori Concepts, in Embodied Content and in Ontology. As interesting this may sound from a scientific and historical point of view, it proves how useless the word is in design presentations. Especially if nobody seems to value the effort of at least trying to define the meaning for that particular situation.
 
Specifically about art, the major Dutch dictionary van Dale defines it as “Conceptual Art is a direction in the Art, where just the choice of the artist for a particular object, makes that object into Art.” 

It’s a guaranteed hit. You can never miss. Anything goes. Incidentally, I would not know how non-conceptual art looks, but that could be just me. I am, after all, a designer, not an artist.
But see here what happens. A designer makes a book, for instance selecting different kinds of paper for every page. But this designer is a conceptual thinker, not really interested in how the actual production of the book should take place. So it does fit into the concept that if the book is bound from  booklets of 16 or 32 pages each, the same paper will turn up again later in the book, when the other side of the booklet is reached. The page number where this happens is fixed, determined by the type of folding. For the concept-designer, the artist, this is a disturbing thought. It is much easier to tell other people to solve this kind of details. The artist must do Art. Not bothered by the fact that the sequence and folding of pages actually is a very fundamental issue in the creation of books.
Concept then, is perhaps better defined as “whatever you make, before throwing it over a fence”. Don’t worry about the problems that other people may run into. That is their problem, not yours. Deepening is not necessary. 
The best definition of Concept could be: The ultimate designers laziness.

It is a prevailed idea at many art schools, that design students should not be bothered too much by “how and why” questions, because that may scare them away. And that will cost money. It is much safer to focus on the conceptual results than to verify if the design really fits the assignment. The evaluation of concept is much easier to adapt, if too few students reach the final quota of graduation. But it is desirable in the long term?
Maybe it’s an idea if the idea-thinkers, the brain-stormers and the concept-designers would just get to work. If you do not agree with that, remember that this story is just a concept.
